README.md, before:

[![status: experimental](https://github.com/GIScience/badges/raw/master/status/experimental.svg)](https://github.com/GIScience/badges#experimental)
[![MIT License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-lightgray.svg)](LICENSE)
![Python Version](https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-3.9.0-blue.svg)

![Banner of NHS AI Lab Skunkworks ](docs/banner.png)

# NHS AI Lab Skunkworks project: Bed Allocation

> A pilot project for the NHS AI (Artificial Intelligence) Lab Skunkworks team, Bed Allocation aims to explore whether machine learning can effectively aid bed management in Kettering General Hospital.

Bed allocation was identified as a suitable opportunity for the AI Skunkworks programme in May 2021.

![Screenshot of the user interface](docs/UI.png)

## Intended Use

This proof of concept ([TRL 4](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Technology_readiness_level)) is intended to demonstrate different approaches to forecasting and bed allocation using machine learning. It is not intended for deployment in a clinical or non-clinical setting without further development and compliance with the [UK Medical Device Regulations 2002](https://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2002/618/contents/made) where the product qualifies as a medical device.

## Background

The NHS AI Lab Skunkworks team and the Kettering General Hospital NHS Foundation Trust (KGH) commissioned a 12-week project via the Accelerated Capability Environment (ACE) to test whether Machine Learning (ML) can assist with bed allocation.

Faculty, an applied AI company, was engaged 
to collaborate closely with KGH to develop a Proof of Concept (PoC) to demonstrate how artificial intelligence (AI) could be used to enable both site managers and less experienced staff members to allocate and optimise patient movement and safety within the hospital. 

## Data Protection

This project was subject to a Data Protection Impact Assessment (DPIA), ensuring the protection of the data used in line with the [UK Data Protection Act 2018](https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2018/12/contents/enacted) and [UK GDPR](https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/dp-at-the-end-of-the-transition-period/data-protection-and-the-eu-in-detail/the-uk-gdpr/). No data or trained models are shared in this repository.

## Overview

> The full [technical report (PDF)](docs/NHS_AI_Lab_Skunkworks_Bed_Allocation_Technical_Report.pdf) is available to download.

This project consists of 4 components:

Component|Description|Documentation
---|---|---
Virtual Hospital|Defines a hospital with wards and beds|[`src/hospital`](src/hospital)
Allocation Agent|Allocates a new patient based on the virtual hospital environment and constraints|[`src/agent`](src/agent)
Demand Forecast|Generates a forecast for bed demand based on historical data|[`src/forecasting`](src/forecasting)
UI|A web-based frontend built with Plotly Dash that integrates the virtual hospital, allocation and demand forecast components|`app`

Using historical admissions data, the forecast model feeds into the allocation agent (for Monte Carlo Tree Search) and suggests the best available bed for an incoming patient:

![Overview of how components interact](docs/overview.png)


## Getting Started

This project requires Python 3, If your system is running an older version
of Python we recommend creating a conda environment with Python 3.9 to install
the package.

For standard installation run `pip install .` from within the repo.

To install in dev mode with the [Pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/en/6.2.x/) testing suite available run
```pip install -e ."[testing]"```.

To launch the UI run `python app/run.py`.

## NHS AI Lab Skunkworks
The project is supported by the NHS AI Lab Skunkworks, which exists within the NHS AI Lab at NHSX to support the health and care community to rapidly progress ideas from the conceptual stage to a proof of concept.

Find out more about the [NHS AI Lab Skunkworks](https://www.nhsx.nhs.uk/ai-lab/ai-lab-programmes/skunkworks/).
Join our [Virtual Hub](https://future.nhs.uk/connect.ti/system/text/register) to hear more about future problem-sourcing event opportunities.
Get in touch with the Skunkworks team at [aiskunkworks@nhsx.nhs.uk](aiskunkworks@nhsx.nhs.uk).

## Licence

Unless stated otherwise, the codebase is released under [the MIT Licence][mit].
This covers both the codebase and any sample code in the documentation.

The documentation is [© Crown copyright][copyright] and available under the terms
of the [Open Government 3.0][ogl] licence.

[mit]: LICENCE
[copyright]: http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/information-management/re-using-public-sector-information/uk-government-licensing-framework/crown-copyright/
[ogl]: http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3/

Commit message:

Remove serialised objects and include instructions on how to generate them

README.md, after:

[![status: experimental](https://github.com/GIScience/badges/raw/master/status/experimental.svg)](https://github.com/GIScience/badges#experimental)
[![MIT License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-lightgray.svg)](LICENSE)
![Python Version](https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-3.9.0-blue.svg)

![Banner of NHS AI Lab Skunkworks ](docs/banner.png)

# NHS AI Lab Skunkworks project: Bed Allocation

> A pilot project for the NHS AI (Artificial Intelligence) Lab Skunkworks team, Bed Allocation aims to explore whether machine learning can effectively aid bed management in Kettering General Hospital.

Bed allocation was identified as a suitable opportunity for the AI Skunkworks programme in May 2021.

![Screenshot of the user interface](docs/UI.png)

## Intended Use

This proof of concept ([TRL 4](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Technology_readiness_level)) is intended to demonstrate different approaches to forecasting and bed allocation using machine learning. It is not intended for deployment in a clinical or non-clinical setting without further development and compliance with the [UK Medical Device Regulations 2002](https://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2002/618/contents/made) where the product qualifies as a medical device.

## Background

The NHS AI Lab Skunkworks team and the Kettering General Hospital NHS Foundation Trust (KGH) commissioned a 12-week project via the Accelerated Capability Environment (ACE) to test whether Machine Learning (ML) can assist with bed allocation.

Faculty, an applied AI company, was engaged 
to collaborate closely with KGH to develop a Proof of Concept (PoC) to demonstrate how artificial intelligence (AI) could be used to enable both site managers and less experienced staff members to allocate and optimise patient movement and safety within the hospital. 

## Data Protection

This project was subject to a Data Protection Impact Assessment (DPIA), ensuring the protection of the data used in line with the [UK Data Protection Act 2018](https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2018/12/contents/enacted) and [UK GDPR](https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/dp-at-the-end-of-the-transition-period/data-protection-and-the-eu-in-detail/the-uk-gdpr/). No data or trained models are shared in this repository.

## Overview

> The full [technical report (PDF)](docs/NHS_AI_Lab_Skunkworks_Bed_Allocation_Technical_Report.pdf) is available to download.

This project consists of 4 components:

Component|Description|Documentation
---|---|---
Virtual Hospital|Defines a hospital with wards and beds|[`src/hospital`](src/hospital)
Allocation Agent|Allocates a new patient based on the virtual hospital environment and constraints|[`src/agent`](src/agent)
Demand Forecast|Generates a forecast for bed demand based on historical data|[`src/forecasting`](src/forecasting)
UI|A web-based frontend built with Plotly Dash that integrates the virtual hospital, allocation and demand forecast components|`app`

Using historical admissions data, the forecast model feeds into the allocation agent (for Monte Carlo Tree Search) and suggests the best available bed for an incoming patient:

![Overview of how components interact](docs/overview.png)


## Getting Started

### Installation

This project requires Python 3, If your system is running an older version
of Python we recommend creating a conda environment with Python 3.9 to install
the package.

For standard installation run `pip install .` from within the repo.

To install in dev mode with the [Pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/en/6.2.x/) testing suite available run
```pip install -e ."[testing]"```.

### Generating required data artefacts

The user interface integrates the greedy allocation approach, which is independent of the time series forecast, as well as a visual forecast of upcoming patients.

The visual forecast has two operating modes, specified in https://github.com/nhsx/pre-publication-skunkworks-bed-allocation/blob/6520c69ab2611b4fdf6252e12f79b1a74c972baa/app/app/api.py#L30:

1. Dummy forecast data (default, a sine wave)
2. Historic forecast data

To operate the tool in dummy mode you will need to create the minumum required data artefacts:

#### 1. Create a virtual hospital

Follow the instructions in the [Virtual Hospital Notebook](notebooks/1.Virtual_Hospital_Environment.ipynb), which will create and store the `hospital.pkl` file in `data/`.

#### 2. Create a forecast split of patient attributes

The forecast is applied to a random split of patient attributes, which can be generated by:

Run `python app/app/data/get_forecast_split.py`

> Note that this script currently takes ~2 hours to generate the required pickle file

This will create the `forecast_split_random.pkl` file in `app/app/data/`.

### Launching the user interface

To launch the UI run `python app/run.py`.

## NHS AI Lab Skunkworks
The project is supported by the NHS AI Lab Skunkworks, which exists within the NHS AI Lab at NHSX to support the health and care community to rapidly progress ideas from the conceptual stage to a proof of concept.

Find out more about the [NHS AI Lab Skunkworks](https://www.nhsx.nhs.uk/ai-lab/ai-lab-programmes/skunkworks/).
Join our [Virtual Hub](https://future.nhs.uk/connect.ti/system/text/register) to hear more about future problem-sourcing event opportunities.
Get in touch with the Skunkworks team at [aiskunkworks@nhsx.nhs.uk](aiskunkworks@nhsx.nhs.uk).

## Licence

Unless stated otherwise, the codebase is released under [the MIT Licence][mit].
This covers both the codebase and any sample code in the documentation.

The documentation is [© Crown copyright][copyright] and available under the terms
of the [Open Government 3.0][ogl] licence.

[mit]: LICENCE
[copyright]: http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/information-management/re-using-public-sector-information/uk-government-licensing-framework/crown-copyright/
[ogl]: http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3/
